# polar-broken-paper
Contains all analysis scripts for our paper under review at Journal of Experimental Social Psychology: Dealing with government dysfunction: Perceived electoral system brokenness explains the effect of high and low perceived polarization on support for fixes. Study 1-4b scripts correspond with Study 1-4b included in the manuscript. Note that Study 4b is actually Study 11 in sequence (the last study to occur in this package of studies). All other study scripts are included in the supplemental materials to support our submission.

Paper Abstract:

In five pre-registered experiments, we demonstrate the causal effects of political
polarization and, especially, electoral system brokenness on desire for inclusion of a third party candidate and support for potential fixes to the electoral system. We first manipulated perceived issue polarization between two candidates in a fictional election to be high, medium, or low and showed that the high and low polarization conditions, compared to the medium condition, evoked greater desire for inclusion of a third candidate. Then we established that perceiving the electoral system as broken statistically mediated the effect of high and low polarization on greater desire for inclusion. We next demonstrated experimental mediation in two ways: via a manipulation-of-mediator design (Pirlott & MacKinnon, 2016) in which we manipulated the proposed mediator (i.e., perceived electoral system brokenness) and, separately, via a moderation-of process design (Spencer, Zanna, & Fong, 2005) in which we simultaneously manipulated both perceived polarization and perceived brokenness. Both perceived issue polarization (high and low versus medium, and high versus low, excluding medium) and perceived brokenness exert causal effects on greater desire for inclusion of a third party candidate. When people perceive high and low issue polarization and when people perceive brokenness in the electoral system they support actions that pose potential fixes to the brokenness, such as including a third-party or independent candidate in elections. Our findings offer implications for both the practice of politics and for broader psychological theory.

Overview of Studies and Analysis Plan:

The current research on polarization has focused on high polarization in particular, presumably because it is more frequently observed in today’s political the world compared to low polarization. Yet, if, as we propose, people interpret both high and low polarization as indicators of brokenness in the electoral system, we predict similar effects for both levels of polarization. The primary tests of our hypotheses examine one method of opting for an alternative direction within the political system: desire for inclusion of a third party or independent candidate in an election. In the present work, we are primarily interested in this outcome as an indicator of “searching for an additional option” rather than as literal support for a particular third party (e.g., Green, Libertarian) or any particular third-party or independent candidate. We predict both high and low perceived polarization will correspond with greater support for inclusion of a third party or independent candidate and that the effects will be explained by views of the electoral system as broken.

In a set of five pre-registered experiments, we systematically test causal hypotheses related to the effects of perceived issue polarization and perceived electoral system brokenness on support for fixes to the electoral system, such as desire for inclusion of a third candidate. We create a novel political setting in which we set perceived issue polarization to be high, medium, or low and test the effect of polarization on desire for inclusion of a third party or independent candidate. 

Relevant to the POL_study1 script: We predict that participants in the low and high polarization conditions together will report greater desire for inclusion compared to participants in the medium condition (Hypothesis 1) and that participants in the low and high polarization conditions will report similar desire (Hypothesis 2). 

Relevant to the POL_study2 script: In a second experiment, we replicate Experiment 1 and test whether perceived polarization also affects perceived system brokenness (Hypothesis 3) and whether those views statistically mediate the effect on desire for inclusion of a third party candidate (Hypothesis 4). 

In Experiments 1 and 2, we use planned contrasts in one-way ANOVA to: (1) compare results in the low and high polarization conditions together to the medium polarization condition (coding scheme: low polarization = -1, medium polarization = 2, high polarization = -1), and (2) compare results in the low and high polarization conditions to each other, excluding the medium polarization condition (coding scheme: low polarization = -1, medium polarization = 0, high polarization = 1).

Following the test of statistical mediation, we then test for experimental mediation in two ways. 

Relevant to the POL_study3 script: In Experiment 3, we apply causal chain logic in directly manipulating perceived electoral system brokenness and testing via independent t-tests whether desire for inclusion of a third party candidate is greater when the electoral system is described as broken versus not-broken (Hypothesis 5). 

Relevant to the POL_study4 and POL_study4b_study11 scripts: Finally, in the fourth and fifth experiments, we employ a concurrent double randomization design (Pirlott & MacKinnon, 2016; also referred to as moderation-of process: Spencer et al., 2005) and simultaneously manipulate both polarization and brokenness to test: (a) whether perceived brokenness, but not perceived polarization—fully explains the effect on desire for inclusion of a third candidate (Hypothesis 6), (b) whether polarization and brokenness condition exert interactive effects on desire (Hypothesis 7), and (c) whether the same pattern of effects extends to support for third parties more generally (Hypothesis 8) and support for additional methods of fixing the broader electoral system (Hypothesis 9). In Experiments 4a and 4b, we used similar contrasts as in Experiments 1 and 2 to test the effects of the polarization and brokenness manipulations on our outcomes.

The scripts that end in "simcomp_adjustedcontrasts" contain the contrast tests adjusted for non-homogeneity of variances across conditions for the respective study indicated in the file name.

We conducted all analyses in RStudio (version 1.2.1335). 

